---
title: 'A FEniCS Framework for Electro-Chemo-Mechanical Modeling  of Anodeless Solid-State Batteries'
authors:
  - name:
      literal: 'Filippo Agnelli'
    affiliations:
      - 'Structural Engineering Department, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA'
    email: 'fagnelli@ucsd.edu'
  - name:
      literal: 'H. Alicia Kim'
    affiliations:
      - 'Structural Engineering Department, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA'
license: CC-BY-4.0
exports:
  - format: pdf
    template: ../../template

---

**Submission type:** Presentation

**Presenter:** Filippo Agnelli (University of California, San Diego)

Solid-state batteries (SSBs) are promising energy storage technologies offering higher energy density and improved safety than conventional lithium-ion batteries, and are critical for meeting the rapid growth of the electric vehicle market and the demand for carbon neutrality. However, SSBs - particularly anodeless cells, where lithium originates from the cathodes and plates during cycling - face challenges such as non-uniform deposition, large volume changes that limit cyclability and degrade performance.

This work proposes a FEniCS-based electro-chemo-mechanical framework for the analysis SSBs, employed to simulate the lithium plating during a charge in a anodeless cell. As a first step, an adapted P3D model - a high-fidelity, multiscale electrochemical model incorporating mass and charge conservation, reaction kinetics, and a simplified microstructure - was employed to assess lithium plating distribution throughout a pouch cell. To further capture the lithium growth mechanism, a rectangular subdomain at Li metal /solid electrolyte (SE) interface is considered. A microscale electrochemical model is coupled with elastic material behavior to capture stress-induced shifts in electrochemical potential. During charging, eigenstrain generated by lithium plating influence reaction kinetics, diffusion, and the evolving stress field, giving rise to a strongly interdependent system. The coupling was controlled using OpenMDAO, an open-source Python framework for efficient model integration.

Our study investigates lithium growth morphology as a function of current rate, stack pressure, and initial interface roughness. Through a parametric analysis, we derive guidelines to predict whether plating remains uniform or evolves into dendritic growth, potentially leading to cracking in the SE. This work highlights the need for tailoring of external pressure and SE interface heterogeneity toward achieving stable electrodeposition in anodeless systems at high current rates.


